- This video was made
possible by Tab for a Cause.
Raise money for charity
just by opening new tabs
which we're going to do anyway.
The coronavirus is an all-out pandemic.
We're close to reaching levels
of almost 100,000 new infections per day.
But obviously somebody
has to be at fault, right?
Some have blamed President Trump,
President Trump has blamed China,
and Fox News can't decide
who it wants to blame.
But at least we can all agree
that this is Florida's fault.
But of course there are
a lot of people suffering
in significant ways and many dying
as a result of the coronavirus pandemic.
And that leaves many wondering
who is liable for this whole mess?
And more importantly, can I sue them?
So by popular demand, and I
got a lot of requests for this,
today we're gonna cover
whether you can sue China,
whether you can sue President Trump,
or Fox News over handling
the coronavirus crisis.
(fanfare music)
Hey, Legal Eagles, it's
time to think like a lawyer
because the coronavirus is in the U.S.,
and as Americans when there's
a problem we file suit.
- Touch me and I'll sue.
- But in the court of law
the question still remains
who, if anyone, can be
legally held accountable
for the damages suffered
from the coronavirus?
I mean this is America.
There has to be someone that we can sue
over this coronavirus, right?
Well, let's take a look at
a few of the big players
when it comes to who may be responsible
for the size and magnitude
of the current coronavirus pandemic.
So first, can we sue China?
Blame certainly just
doesn't lie with one person
or even one country for that matter,
but for those affected by COVID-19
one might first look to where
it all originated: China.
It was first discovered in Wuhan, China,
where the virus first appeared
as this mysterious pneumonia
that began with just a few
infections of a few patients.
And it was China, where
despite having an alleged
first-class infectious disease
reporting system in place,
they completely failed to
contain the spread of the virus
because of local health officials' fear
of providing bad news to the
central health authorities
for the Republic of China.
It could certainly be argued
that but for China's failure
to take the proper proactive measures
this virus could have
been largely contained,
and many, if not most,
would not have had to suffer
the impact of the virus.
So that is the argument,
and whether you believe
that argument or not,
I will leave that up to you.
But it does raise the question
if there is any veracity to it
could someone who become
sick with the coronavirus
have a legitimate legal
claim against China?
We don't often hear about individuals
suing another foreign government,
and there's a very good reason for that.
There's one hurdle that's
almost impossible to overcome
under the current
circumstances, and that hurdle
is known as the Foreign
Sovereign Immunities Act
which was passed in 1976 to
protect foreign sovereigns
from the burdens and costs of litigation.
You can't really sue foreign governments.
Now despite the alleged mishandling
of the coronavirus outbreak
and the lack of transparency
and presumably the ensuing damages
that resulted from the
government and China's actions,
any attempt to sue them
would be completely in vain.
The Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act
states that, "A foreign
state shall be immune
"from the jurisdiction of the courts
"of the United States and of the States."
The force and scope of the
immunity is pretty daunting.
For instance, when the family of a child
who was killed by an allegedly
malfunctioning hunting rifle
sued the manufacturer of the rifle
which was actually owned
by the Chinese government,
the defendant didn't even bother
to file a response to the complaint.
Instead the company
just sent the complaint
back to the plaintiff
and the court ultimately
held that the company
was immune under the Foreign
Sovereign Immunities Act.
Now on its face this
law might seem unfair,
but there's a legitimate purpose
behind the broad sovereign immunity right.
It's essentially an act of reciprocity
in ensuring that the United
States will not be sued
in other countries as well.
Now there are exceptions to this immunity,
but they're incredibly limited.
There are some carve-outs
regarding terrorist acts
like what we've seen with
Iran and Libya, for example.
And there is an exception
if a foreign state
actually waives its immunity
or if the lawsuit is based
upon a commercial activity.
But here the only potentially
relevant exception
would be if damages were,
"caused by the tortious act
"or omission of that foreign state
"or of any official or
employee of that foreign state
"while acting within the scope
of his office or employment."
Now this sounds like it might
be a plausible exception,
except for the fact that this
section specifically bars
any claim "based upon the
exercise or performance
"or the failure to exercise
"or perform a discretionary function
"regardless of whether
the discretion be abused."
Now based on the information
we currently have,
it's not clear how any lawsuits stemming
from the coronavirus pandemic
could find a plausible way
to get into one of these exceptions
and overcome the immunity that
almost all governments have.
But you don't know until
you try, I suppose,
and that's exactly what an attorney
by the name of Matthew
Moore out of Boca Raton
is attempting to do right now.
Just recently a class action lawsuit
has been filed against the
People's Republic of China,
among other parties,
for damages that have resulted
from the global pandemic.
The central allegation
of the complaint is that,
"The PRC and the other
defendants knew that COVID-19
"was dangerous and capable
of causing a pandemic,
"yet slowly acted, proverbially
put their heads in the sand
"and/or covered it up for their
own economic self-interest."
The lawsuit then goes on
to allege injury, damage,
and loss related to the
outbreak of the COVID-19 virus,
"including discernible
physical manifestations
"and injuries of trauma
from the negligent conduct,
"including, but not
limited to physical pains,
"headaches, anxiety, and insomnia."
The plaintiffs are
arguing that the lawsuit
falls under these exceptions
the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act
as a commercial activity,
and because of the tortious harm or death
that resulted from the Chinese
government's negligence
in handling the coronavirus outbreak.
Now ironically, none of
the initial plaintiffs
have actually contracted
the coronavirus itself,
which leads to all kinds
of standing issues,
but on top of that, what
they're effectively alleging
is that the Chinese government
didn't handle the situation
as well as it should have,
but you can't sue foreign
governments just because you wish
they would have done something different.
That's exactly what sovereigns do.
They govern and you don't
get to sue governments
over mishandling of things
in their core function.
This lawsuit is definitely
going to get dismissed,
and barring any new information
almost all of the
lawsuits in a similar vein
are going to be dismissed as well.
But that's the Chinese government.
It's all the way across the Pacific.
What about a government closer to home?
What about suing President Trump himself?
- I don't take responsibility at all.
- What about suing him
for how he has handled
the coronavirus response?
- When you say me, I didn't do it.
- The argument is that President Trump
has told people to go back
to work while being sick,
stated that the virus
would go away miraculously,
and even gave Americans
false hope by claiming that
we were on the brink of
having a vaccine available
and that tests would be plentiful
and available to anyone that wanted them.
- Anybody right now and yesterday,
anybody that needs a test
gets a test, they're there.
They have the tests, and
the tests are beautiful.
Anybody that needs a test gets a test.
- And there are reports that the president
resisted widespread testing
to keep the number of
infections artificially low.
- I like the numbers being where they are.
- And if that's not enough,
let's take a very specific recent example
where President Trump took to Twitter
to promote two antimaleria drugs:
chloroquine and its
derivative hydroxychloroquine
as miracle cures for COVID-19.
And while there may be
some potential benefit
from these drugs, the manner
in which the president
has presented these drugs,
which is based on incredibly
preliminary information
led some to believe that
you could take the drugs
as a prophylactic
against the virus itself.
Such was the case for an Arizona couple
that heard the president's report
and realized they had
some fish tank cleaner
that contained the so-called miracle drug.
And because of their
reliance on President Trump,
they both decided to ingest
the fish tank cleaner,
and as a result the wife was hospitalized
while the husband actually died.
Now I'm sure most people
wouldn't think to ingest
fish tank cleaner,
let alone take it
prophylactically against a virus
that is not actually fatal for
most people that contract it,
but the point is there was
an allegedly misleading
if not outright false statement
made by the president.
- It's not like a brand new
drug that's been just created
that may have an unbelievable
monumental effect like kill you.
- People relied on those statements,
and as a direct result of that reliance
individuals were injured
and one actually died.
Slam dunk case, right?
Well, not so fast, because
just as foreign governments
have immunity from suit, so
too do domestic governments,
and in particular the president.
In the Supreme Court case
of Nixon versus Fitzgerald,
the contractor sued the
president, among others,
for the loss of his position
with the U.S. Air Force.
But the Supreme Court held
in a five to four decision
that the President is
entitled to absolute immunity
from liability for civil damages
based on his official acts.
The Court made clear distinctions
on presidential liability
noting that presidents could
still be charged criminally
for official acts.
In addition, unofficial acts of presidents
were also fair play.
This distinction between
official and unofficial acts
was solidified in the famous lawsuit
by Paula Jones against
then President Clinton
for alleged sexual harassment committed
while he was governor of Arkansas.
The Supreme Court held that
there was no justifiable reason
including separation of powers
that would prohibit federal courts
from hearing Jones' sexual harassment suit
since it did not have to
do with any official acts
made by President Clinton while in office.
Justice Stevens who wrote
the majority opinion
reasoned that, "The
litigation of questions
"that relate entirely to
the unofficial conduct
"of the individual who
happens to be the President
"poses no perceptible
risk of misallocation
"of either judicial power
or executive power."
But where a suit involves the
official acts of the president
in his capacity as president,
then the president would
be immune from suit.
Now the argument for giving
the president immunity
for official acts is twofold.
First, the Supreme Court
noted in Clinton versus Jones
the president needs immunity
for official acts so he can,
"perform designated functions
effectively without fear."
The second justification for
this immunity lies in the fact
that there are sufficient
checks and balances
on the president that most others
including other executive
officials don't have to face.
In addition to increased
scrutiny the president faces
from the media and a
desire for reelection,
Congress can oversee
the president's actions
in a variety of ways including
the power of impeachment.
At least in theory.
Many have argued that the president
has misled the American people
and has mismanaged the
coronavirus pandemic.
- You know, a lot of people
think that goes away in April
with the heat as the heat comes in.
Typically that will go away in April.
We're in great shape though.
- And that, as a result of those actions,
it should be at least be
considered negligence,
but it would be impossible to argue
that any of those actions or lack thereof
fell outside of his official conduct
as President of the United States.
And it's for this reason
whether you like him or not
you cannot sue him for the
actions that he has taken
as President of the United States.
Okay, so we're zero for
two, no governments,
but there has to be
someone that we can sue
and actually get to the
merits of the case, right?
Well, maybe.
Some have argued that Fox News
as well as other cable news channels
have promoted incorrect
information, misleading comments,
and other conspiracy theories
that have been detrimental
to actually fighting the
coronavirus pandemic.
- As the Surgeon General
said on Justice last week,
you don't need a mask unless you're sick.
- But the issue of suing Fox News
or other cable news channels
isn't exactly coming out of left field.
And, as a result, some have argued
that Fox News ought to face some liability
for the misinformation that
they allegedly have circulated.
And Fox News itself
appears to be concerned
they may be subject to a
potential lawsuit form viewers
for their misleading
reporting of the coronavirus.
In fact, just recently
Fox Business Network
parted ways with Trish Regan
just a few days after she
made the bold declaration
that the coronavirus was,
"another attempt to
impeach the president."
- And like with the Mueller investigation,
like with Ukrainegate, they
don't care who they hurt.
- So if indeed their reporting
is misleading or false
and with a bunch of viewers
that showed up a little late
to the game having relied on
the message pushed by Fox News,
could these viewers have a
cause of action against Fox News
for injuries that they suffered
as a result of the coronavirus?
Well the initial answer is
they could probably file suit,
but that doesn't necessarily mean
that the suit would be successful.
Probably quite the opposite.
In theory, an individual
could bring a civil lawsuit
against Fox News for committing an act
or omission that gave
rise to an injury or harm
for which the courts
could impose liability
commonly known as a tort.
The argument would most likely be
that they breached a
duty to the plaintiffs
in presenting them with false
or misleading information
and that as a result of which
the plaintiffs suffered
significant damages.
Now we don't have time
to get into the nuance
of every aspect of tort
law and civil litigation,
but most likely a claim of this nature
could be made by a plaintiff
on the grounds of something
like public nuisance
or maybe some form of
negligent misrepresentation.
In a suit for public nuisance
the plaintiff can recover
for activities that hurt a neighborhood
or society as a whole.
But to be liable for public
nuisance it must be proven
that the defendant interfered
with public property
or a right that is common to the public.
But usually that's reserved
for creating a public health hazard.
Another argument could be
made for suing Fox News
under a negligent
misrepresentation theory,
although that's typically
seen in contract actions
or quasi-contract actions
where the main premise
of the misrepresentation
has to do with a person's failure
to exercise a reasonable duty of care
which in turn causes another person
to be injured in some manner.
Basically someone says
something that's false.
They either knew it was false at the time,
or they should have known
it was false at the time,
and as a result another person
detrimentally relies on that
and incurs damages.
But Fox News doesn't have
a contractual relationship
with its viewers and doesn't
really have an obligation
to do anything on behalf of its viewers
including telling them the truth.
Some states have consumer
protection statutes
that might apply.
For example, a consumer watchdog group
called WASHLITE in Washington State
filed a suit against Fox News
claiming its news coverage
violated consumer protection statutes.
That particular suit also alleged
that Fox committed the tort of outrage
which isn't really a thing.
Sometimes that's a synonym
for intentional infliction
of emotional distress,
but that definitely doesn't apply here.
So the first suit out of
the gate suing Fox News
is pretty much nonsense
and is absolutely going to get
dismissed very very quickly.
In general throwing nonsensical
claims into a complaint
is not a good look, and
that doesn't bode well
for the success of your lawsuit.
Now despite having these plausible
and some not so plausible legal grounds
to file suit against Fox News,
it's important to remember
that the goal is not
just to file a lawsuit
but actually to win and get damages.
Now beyond the initial hurdles
such as proving that a plaintiff
could establish justifiable reliance
on information received
from a partisan news source,
Fox News will have many
many defenses in its arsenal
to probably get all of
these potential lawsuits
dismissed pretty quickly.
The first and strongest
defense for Fox News
is probably free speech
under the First Amendment.
You might not agree
with Fox News' message,
but they have a First
Amendment right to say it,
and they should.
Now the framework for
the free speech defense
starts with the seminal
case from the 1960s
called New York Times versus Sullivan
which held that the First Amendment's
protections of free speech
are not limited to just
truthful statements,
because, "An erroneous
statement is inevitable
"in free debate, and must be protected
"if the freedoms of expression
"are to have the breathing space
that they need to survive."
Over the years this holding
has led to a fairly bulletproof defense
for all sorts of tort actions
including those for product
liability, defamation,
including those involving media outlets.
Now I have covered the holding
in New York Times versus Sullivan
on this channel many times in the past.
I'll probably do it again
because it is always relevant,
but the idea is that we
shouldn't punish misleading
or false speech in most cases.
We should simply fight it
with more accurate speech.
And we generally don't want
the government making decisions
as to what speech is true
and what speech is false.
- They are the fake, fake disgusting news.
(crowd cheering)
- That's a dangerous road to go down.
Another defense would be the
lack of proximate causation.
Fox News would probably argue
that any plaintiff would
be unable to show that
whatever the misleading
statements from Fox News
was the actual proximate act
that led to their contracting
of the coronavirus or
the economic downturn.
There are lots of different factors
going on at any given time,
and it's unlikely that
Fox News contributed
in the last instance to
the damages suffered.
And another defense is that
Fox News would simply argue
that they don't have a duty
to any of their viewers.
There's not a special relationship
that gives rise to any special duty.
If you are walking by a pool
and you see someone drowning,
generally speaking unless you
pushed them into the pool,
you don't have a duty to pull them out.
Now the no-duty rule,
which has its origin in cases
involving property owners,
generally holds that a
defendant owes no duty of care
to warn, protect, or insure against risks
that are common, frequent, or expected.
And since Fox News
doesn't have any particular
special relationship
with any of its viewers,
it doesn't owe a duty
and therefore can't be held liable
for any kind of negligent acts.
This is generally what
we call a SLAPP suit,
or in other words a strategic lawsuit
against public participation.
And if you didn't like Bob
Murray suing John Oliver,
which I did a video about,
then you really shouldn't be in favor
of people trying to
stifle news organizations
or politicians for
exercising their free speech.
We might not like what they have to say,
but they should be allowed to say it.
So yeah, this is America.
If you can dream up a successful lawsuit,
then odds are there will be an attorney
that will file it for you.
- Can you imagine a world without lawyers?
(bright music)
Oh!
- But just because you can file a lawsuit
doesn't mean that you should.
And it's an unfortunate reality
that so many people are suffering
under the circumstances,
but the answer is not always a lawsuit.
It's hard for me to say
that as an attorney,
but it is not always the case
that the best thing to do
is to sue people or to even
be able to sue certain people.
There are good reasons
why we have some of these
legal defenses in place.
Now I know you think you'd
make the world a better place
by suing these people into oblivion,
but really you'd be
doing more harm than good
because we don't want
lawsuits that stifle speech.
But if you do really wanna
do some good for this world,
try Tab for a Cause, which lets
you raise money for charity
just by opening up new tabs
and browsing the internet
which you were probably
going to do anyway.
Tab for a Cause is a
Google Chrome extension
that allows you to pick
the charity of your choice
and then every time you open up a new tab
instead of a blank page it displays
a beautiful new customizable
tab with a couple of tiny ads.
The money that you generate is
then donated to your charity.
You see in real time how much
money is being generated.
And it's gamified so that
every time you open up a tab
you create a heart which
you can then donate
to the charity of your choice.
Tab for a Cause is partnered
with several COVID-19
specific charities too,
so you can fight the effects
of coronavirus directly.
Directly from your couch.
The gorgeous new tab that you
open up is really helpful too.
You can customize it with graphics.
I like to see pictures of the outdoors
to remember what the outdoors look like.
Anyone remember the outdoors?
It was really great, wasn't it?
And then it lets you customize
things like bookmarks,
create to-do lists, and
even write yourself notes,
which I find really helpful
to have in a new tab
every time I open it up.
And once you've opened up a tab or two,
you can choose the actual charity
that you want the money to go to.
There's absolutely no charge to you,
and it makes a positive
difference in this world.
All you have to do is click
the link in the description
and install the Google Chrome extension.
Tab for a Cause users like you
have raised hundreds of
thousands of dollars for charity.
It has got to be the easiest possible way
to donate to charity.
You could even just sit there
and open up a bunch of tabs for fun.
So just click on the
link in the description
to download the extension
and do some good by doing
what you were gonna do anyway.